# Milestones in Autonomous Driving and Intelligent Vehicles: Survey of Surveys

Long Chen, Yuchen Li, Chao Huang, Bai Li, Yang Xing,
Daxin Tian, Li Li, Zhongxu Hu, Xiaoxiang Na, Zixuan Li,
Siyu Teng, Jinjun Wang, Dongpu Cao,
Nanning Zheng, and Fei-Yue Wang,

Manuscript received Sep 29, 2022; accepted Nov 01, 2022. Date of publication ***,**, 20xx; date of current version *** **, 20xx. (Corresponding author: Fei-Yue Wang.)This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (62006256) and Key Research and Development Program of Guangzhou (202007050002 202007050004).Long Chen and Fei-Yue Wang are with the State Key Laboratory of Management and Control for Complex Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China, and Long Chen is also with Waytous Ltd. (e-mail: long.chen@ia.ac.cn; feiyue.wang@ia.ac.cn).Yuchen Li and Siyu Teng are with BNU-HKBU United International College, Zhuhai, 519087, China and Hong Kong Baptist University, Kowloon, Hong Kong, 999077, China (e-mail: liyuchen2016@hotmail.com; siyuteng@ieee.org).Chao Huang is with the Department of Industrial and System Engineering, Hong Kong Polytechnical University (e-mail: lichao.huang@polyu.edu.hk).Bai Li is with the College of Mechanical and Vehicle Engineering, Hunan University (e-mail: libai@zju.edu.cn).Yang Xing is with the School of Aerospace, Transport, and Manufacturing, Crandled University (e-mail: yang.z@crandeld.ac.uk).Daxin Tian is with the School of Transportation Science and Engineering, Beihang University (e-mail: dtian@buaa.edu.cn).Li Li is with the Department of Automation, Tsinghua University (e-mail: li-li@tsinghua.edu.cn).Zhongxu Hu and Chen Lv are with the Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering of Nanyang Technological University (e-mail: Huzhongxu.hu@ntu.edu.sg; lyuchen@ntu.edu.sg).Xiaoxiang Na is with the Centre for Sustainable Road Freight, University of Cambridge (e-mail: xmln2@cam.ac.uk).Zixuan Li is with Waytous Ltd. (e-mail: lizixuan981258655@gmail.com).Dongpu Cao is with the School of Mechanical Engineering, Tsinghua University (e-mail: dp_cao2016@163.com).Jinjun Wang and Nanning Zheng are with the College of Artificial Intelligence, Xi'an Jiaotong University (e-mail: jinjun@mail.xjtu.edu.cn; nnzheng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn).

###### Abstract

Interest in autonomous driving (AD) and intelligent vehicles (IVs) is growing at a rapid pace due to the convenience, safety, and economic benefits. Although a number of surveys have reviewed research achievements in this field, they are still limited in specific tasks, lack of systematic summary and research directions in the future. Here we propose a Survey of Surveys (SoS) for total technologies of AD and IVs that reviews the history, summarizes the milestones, and provides the perspectives, ethics, and future research directions. To our knowledge, this article is the first SoS with milestones in AD and IVs, which constitutes our complete research work together with two other technical surveys. We anticipate that this article will bring novel and diverse insights to researchers and abecedarians, and serve as a bridge between past and future.

 Survey of surveys, Milestones, Autonomous Driving, Intelligent Vehicles.

## I Introduction

Autonomous driving (AD) and intelligent vehicles (IVs) have recently attracted significant attention from academia as well as industry because of a range of potential benefits. Surveys on AD and IVs occupy an essential position in gathering research achievements, generalizing entire technology development, and forecasting future trends. However, a large majority of surveys only focus on the specific task, and they may have a negative impact on conducting research for abecedarians. The purpose of our work is to systematically summarize the development of AD and propose future research directions from an overall perspective. This paper is the Part 1 of the "Milestones in Autonomous Driving and Intelligent Vehicles", a survey of surveys (SoS), and the Part 2 and 3 will be published soon. This paper collects milestones on surveys of AD and IVs and introduces research perspectives, ethics, and future directions. In other two papers, we review crucial technologies in AD including perception, planning, control, etc. We expect that our work can be considered as a bridge between past and future.

### _History of Autonomous Driving & Intelligent Vehicles_

The first automated, radio-operated vehicle was successfully tested in the USA on 5th August 1921. In 1953, Radio Corporation of America (RCA) Laboratories successfully developed a miniature vehicle that was navigated and controlled by wires. The IVs or called remotely piloted vehicles were limited by technological developments and could only achieve a single unstable function.

The development of AD witnessed a breakthrough in 1980s thanks to the development of computer technology. The US Defence Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) established the Autonomous Land Vehicle (ALV) program in 1983, involving Carnegie Mellon University (CMU), Stanford University, and other academic institutions to realize AD which is the first time to integrate LiDAR, computer vision, and automated control methods. In 1989, CMU pioneered the use of neural networks to guide the control of IVs, and this development laid a foundation for intelligent control techniques.

At the beginning of the 21 century, several competitions worldwide promoted the research on AD. Starting in 2004, DARPA held three competitions to evaluate the capabilities of IVs in harsh and complex environments. Stanford University won the first prize in the competition in 2005, and their vehicle was equipped with a camera, a LiDAR, a radar, a Global Positioning System (GPS), and an Intel CPU. The first Chinese "Intelligent Vehicles Future Challenge Program" was held in 2009, which attracted seven groups to participate, including Hunan University, Beijing Institute of Technology, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Tsinghua University, National University of Defense Technology and University of Parma.

In 2010s, owing to the development of neural networks as well as the computing platform, IVs have gradually moved from private roads to urban roads. VIsLab implemented cross-border transport of IVs from Parma to Shanghai. In 2016, Drive.ai was permitted to test IVs in California. The nuTonomy in Singapore ran a number of autonomous taxis in the same year.

With regard to AD levels, the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) has divided AD into \(6\) levels from L\(0\) to L\(5\). By \(2030\), \(82\) million IVs with L4/L5 will run in the US, Europe, and China. Although AD technology has got impressive development, the issues still exist. In addition, it is still legally in question whether an IV could undertake the responsibility when it involves a traffic accident.

### _Paper Structure_

We divide the article into five sections, including introduction, overall, datasets, perspectives & future, and conclusion. The introduction section contains a brief introduction of history of AD and our contributions. In the overall section, we category the collected survey papers and analyse the statistic results. We also summarize the dataset information on the AD in the datasets section. In the perspective & future section, we provide research perspectives, ethics and future directions on AD.

### _Contributions_

In this paper, we collect 122 survey articles, analyse datasets, and provide research difficulties, directions for future research, and ethics in AD. The most important thing is that the research of AD and IVs has entered a bottleneck period. We wish this article could bring novel and diverse insights for researchers to make breakthroughs.

We summarize three contributions of this article:

1. We introduce an SoS on AD and IVs. In this article, we collect the milestone surveys and category them into several sub-sections.
2. We enumerate the characteristics of AD datasets and summarize the current research perspectives, ethics, and future directions on AD.
3. We conduct a systematic study that attempts to be a bridge between past and future on AD and IVs, and this SoS is the Part 1 of our whole research.

## II Overall

We select 122 survey articles in our paper and the Table I shows the categories and the corresponding numbers of papers. All the surveys are categorized into several sub-sections, including the overall [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13], localization [14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30], static object detection [31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40], dynamic object detection [41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67], scene understanding [68, 69, 70], tracking [71, 72], prediction [73, 74], planning [75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80], E2E [81, 82], control [83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89], system [90, 91, 92, 93], hardware [94, 95, 96], software [97], communication [98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112], simulation [113, 114], interpretability [115], Human-Machine Interface (HMI) [116], and special scenes [117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122]. Table II presents a few highly cited surveys of each sub-section. We provide the title of these articles with the categories, the number of citations, the publication year and a number of special keywords which assist researchers to find the target paper quickly. We plot the whole collected articles on a timeline as Fig. 1. Readers can clearly identify the research area and the published journal of each article according to the abbreviations, and locate the article title and other information by serial numbers. For example, "Ove_TIV[2]" in this figure represents the article can be found at the reference list with index 2, and it belongs to the "Overall" category and published in IEEE Transaction on Intelligent Vehicle (TIV).

## III Datasets

The publicity of various kinds of autonomous driving datasets has made a substantial contribution to the advancement in this area, especially for perception and E2E planning tasks. KITTI [123] provides multiple computer vision tasks on urban roads in Germany. Cityscapes [124], BDD100K [125], Mapillary Vistas [126] have released a number of data with segmentation masks. A*3D [127] enriches the collection scenes, such as the dark night, rainy and snowy.

Some automobile manufacturers publish datasets collected by their vehicles, including H3D [128], A2D2 [129] and the Ford Dataset [130]. For more details, please check Table III, which includes the number of frames, installed sensors, and covering tasks for each dataset. Readers could find the corresponding data by their mission. For E2E planning, the environment is more crucial for developers, and the simulation platform such as Carla [131], Vissim [132], PerScan, AirSim [133], Udacity, Apollo, etc. could assist researchers to conduct experiments on planning and control.

### TABLE II
**THE CRUCIAL SURVEYS AND RELATIVE IN FORMATIONS OF EACH SUB-TASK ON AUTONOMOUS DRIVING**

| Article Name | Category | Cite | Year | Characteristics |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| A Survey of Deep Learning Techniques for Autonomous Driving [6] | Overall | **509** | 2020 | Modular pipeline |
| A Survey of Autonomous Driving: Common Practices and Emerging Technologies [5] | Overall | 485 | 2020 | Automated driving systems |
| Self-driving cars: A survey [12] | Overall | 395 | 2021 | Architecture |
| Autonomous Cars: Research Results, Issues, and Future Challenges [3] | Overall | 291 | 2019 | Challenge |
| Artificial Intelligence Applications in the Development of Autonomous Vehicles: A Survey [10] | Overall | 107 | 2020 | Emerging technologies |
| Simultaneous localization and mapping: A survey of current trends in autonomous driving [14] | Localization | **489** | 2017 | SLAM |
| A survey of the state-of-the-art localization techniques and their potentials for autonomous vehicle applications [15] | Localization | 433 | 2018 | Internet of Vehicles |
| A review of visual-LiDAR fusion based simultaneous localization and mapping [23] | Localization | 120 | 2020 | Autonomous navigation |
| Vehicle dynamic state estimation: state of the art schemes and perspectives [17] | Localization | 100 | 2018 | Pose estimation |
| A review of recent advances in lane detection and departure warning system [32] | Static Detection | **185** | 2018 | Lane departure warning |
| Advances in Vision-Based Lane Detection: Algorithms, Integration, Assessment, and Perspectives on ACP-Based Parallel Vision [33] | Static Detection | 104 | 2018 | ACP parallel theory |
| Computer Vision for Autonomous Vehicles: Problems, Datasets and State of the Art [53] | Dynamic Detection | **532** | 2020 | Datasets |
| Autonomous vehicle perception: The technology of today and tomorrow [45] | Dynamic Detection | 381 | 2018 | Autonomous vehicle application |
| Deep Multi-Modal Object Detection and Semantic Segmentation for Autonomous Driving: Datasets, Methods, and Challenges [60] | Dynamic Detection | 331 | 2021 | Fusion |
| A Survey on 3D Object Detection Methods for Autonomous Driving Applications [47] | Dynamic Detection | 230 | 2019 | 3D object detection |
| Benchmarking Robustness in Object Detection: Autonomous Driving when Winter is Coming [48] | Dynamic Detection | 150 | 2019 | Benchmark datasets |
| Object recognition and detection with deep learning for autonomous driving applications [41] | Dynamic Detection | 112 | 2017 | CNN and SVM |
| Deep Learning-based Vehicle Behaviour Prediction For Autonomous Driving Applications: A Review [74] | Prediction | **141** | 2020 | Deep Learning |
| A Literature Review on the Prediction of Pedestrian Behavior in Urban Scenarios [73] | Prediction | 106 | 2018 | Pedestrian Behavior |
| A survey of motion planning and control techniques for self-driving urban vehicles [75] | Planning | **1637** | 2016 | Information sharing and coordination |
| Planning and Decision-Making for Autonomous Vehicles [76] | Planning | 561 | 2018 | Fleet management |
| A Review of Motion Planning for Highway Autonomous Driving [78] | Planning | 170 | 2020 | Highway |
| Trajectory planning and tracking for autonomous overtaking: State-of-the-art and future prospects [77] | Planning | 143 | 2018 | High-speed driving |
| Deep Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Driving: A Survey [81] | E2E | **143** | 2018 | Reinforcement Learning |
| Driving Style Recognition for Intelligent Vehicle Control and Advanced Driver Assistance: A Survey [83] | Control | **372** | 2017 | Driving style |
| A Survey of Deep Learning Applications to Autonomous Vehicle Control [88] | Control | 211 | 2021 | Vehicle control |
| Automated guided vehicle systems, state-of-the-art control algorithms and techniques [84] | Control | 109 | 2019 | Automated guided vehicle system |
| The architectural implications of autonomous driving: Constraints and acceleration [90] | System | **290** | 2018 | Hardware |
| Edge computing for autonomous driving: Opportunities and challenges [91] | System | 235 | 2019 | Connected |
| Sensor technology in autonomous vehicles: A review [94] | System | 108 | 2018 | Sensor Fusion |
| Control of connected and automated vehicles: State of the art and future challenges [101] | Communication | **322** | 2018 | Energy efficiency |
| A Survey of the Connected Vehicle Landscape—Architectures, Enabling Technologies, Applications,and Development Areas [100] | Communication | 283 | 2017 | Vehicle-to-everything |
| A Survey of Vehicle to Everything (V2X) Testing [107] | Communication | 167 | 2019 | V2X application |
| A Survey of Intrusion Detection for In-Vehicle Networks [108] | Communication | 133 | 2019 | Controller area network |
| Autonomous vehicles that interact with pedestrians: A survey of theory and practice [116] | Interaction | **378** | 2019 | Pedestrian behavior |
| Collaborative vehicle routing: a survey [118] | Interaction | 213 | 2017 | Transportation |

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
4
Fig. 1. We provide all the collected papers on the time axis with abbreviations, consisting of the categories, published journals and the serial number.

### TABLE III
**THE DATASETS ON THE AUTONOMOUS DRIVING1**

| Dataset | Frame | Sensors | Task | Li | Vi | Ra | GP | IM | Ca | Te | Sc | Od | La | Dr | 2D | 3D | Di | OF | SF | PS | Se | Pa | De | Tr | Pr | Pl | E2E | HD |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| KITTI [123] | 15K | 1 | 2 | - | 1 | 1 | - | - | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| CityScapes [124] | 25K | - | 2 | - | 1 | 1 | - | 1 | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| nuScenes [134] | 40K | 1 | 6 | 5 | 1 | 1 | - | - | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| A2D2 [129] | 12K | 5 | 6 | - | 1 | - | - | - | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| Lyft L5 [135] | - | 3 | 7 | - | - | - | - | - | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| A*3D [127] | 39K | 1 | 2 | - | - | - | - | - | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| ApolloScape [136] | 144K | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| BDD100K [125] | 100K | - | 1 | - | 1 | 1 | - | - | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| H3D [128] | 27K | 1 | - | - | 1 | 1 | 1 | - | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| Argoverse [137] | 22K | 2 | 9 | - | 1 | - | - | - | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| Mapillary Vistas [126] | 25K | 1 | 1 | - | 1 | - | - | - | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| Waymo Open [138] | 200K | 5 | 5 | - | - | - | - | - | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| Comma2k19 [139] | 200K | - | 1 | - | 1 | 1 | 1 | - | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| Ford Dataset [130] | 200K | 4 | 7 | - | 1 | 1 | - | - | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| PandaSet [140] | 16K | 2 | 6 | - | 1 | 1 | 1 | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| ONCE [141] | 1M | 1 | 7 | - | - | - | - | - | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| AutoMine [142] | 18K | 1 | 2 | - | 1 | 1 | - | - | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |

1 Li-LiDAR, Vi-Vision, Ra-Radar, GP-Global Positioning System, IM-Inertial Measurement Unit, Ca-CAN data, Te-Temperature data, Sc-Scene Classification,
Od-Odometry, La-Lane Detection, Dr-Driveable Detection, 2D-2D Object Detection, 3D-3D Object Deteciton, Di-Disparity, OF-Optical Flow Estimation,
SF-Scene Flow Estimation, PS-Point Segmentation, Se-Semantic Segmentation, Pa-Panoptic Segmentation, De-Depth Estimation, Tr-Tracking, Pr-Prediction,
Pl-Planning, E2E-End-to-End, HD-High Definition map.

## IV Perspectives and Future

### _Independent Tasks:_

#### IV-A1 **Perception**
Perception is the upstream aspect of autonomous driving systems, and the results of which will heavily influence downstream tasks including planning and motion control. Combined with limited computational resources and time, perception models need to be accurate, robust, and fast. A number of teams have achieved competitive results in academic research on perception, but researchers still need to continue to improve the performance of their models until they could cover the full scene, which is the fundamental characteristic of mass production. We summarise a few possible future research directions as follows: 1) The early fusion strategies & universal structures for multiple sensors. 2) Lifting the 2D to 3D detection adopting effective transfer structures. 3) Making IVs have the capability of automated inference. 4) Developing self-supervised strategies and reducing the relay on huge data. 5) Exploring the cooperative perception and making a dense connection to the following tasks.

#### IV-A2 **Planning**
Trajectory planning technique alone is not the bottleneck of an IV. Despite this, the planning module deserves to consider the limitations in the upstream/downstream modules so that the entire driving performance is improved. The following few aspects are an outlook on some possible future directions: 1) Safe planning for imperfect perception data. 2) Balance of solution quality and speed. 3) Performance consistency in switching between different planners. 4) Interpretability enhancement for a learning-based planner [143].

#### IV-A3 **Control**
The motion control technology of IVs has made remarkable progress. However, due to the complex longitudinal and lateral dynamics of the vehicle, mutual coupling performance objectives, and the wide application of advanced communication technology, there are still many important and unsolved problems in the research of IV motion control that need to be explored and recognized. The following is a preliminary outlook on its possible development directions: 1) Coordinated control method of longitudinal and lateral motion of IV under random uncertainty and delay conditions. 2) Multi-performance objective global optimization technology for IV motion control. 3) Theory and method of IV cooperative control in the Internet of Vehicles environment. 4) Fault tolerant method for control systems. 5) Piratical application of control systems in a real traffic environment.

#### IV-A4 **Testing**
Testing is a crucial process before the mass production of IVs. Test vehicles require to complete a series of driving tasks with various difficulties in testing areas or private roads. The purpose of this process is to locate the remaining problems of IVs, to provide the last opportunity to modify the program and to reduce the accident rate of IVs on public roads. For future research on IVs testing, researchers could 1) introduce a novel evaluation criterion on thinking rationally; 2) develop the evaluation criteria for virtual simulation testing; 3) attempt to narrow the gap between the real and virtual testing scenarios [144, 145].

#### IV-A5 **Human Behaviors**
The increase of autonomy for commercial passenger vehicles will not reduce the necessity of human behaviors and human factors issues but may increase the complexity of these problems. The responsibility of ensuring a safe, comfortable, and pleasant journey is extremely heavy for IVs. Future work for HMI systems on IVs should further focus on the development of mutual understanding and mutual trust mechanisms, ensuring communication transparency and efficiency with both onboard and surrounding users. The personalized and human-centered design approach should be highlighted to guarantee the IVs are also able to understand user characteristics and personalities in case to interact with humans more effectively. Meanwhile, security, privacy, and ethics issues are also expected to be carefully considered [146, 147, 148, 149, 150, 151].

### _Ethics on Autonomous Driving:_

#### IV-B1 **Normative Ethics**
The normative ethical issues centre around the moral dilemmas where an IV has to make a choice between alternatives that will inevitably result in the sacrifice of human lives [152, 153, 154]. One example of adapting the trolley problem of IV is given by Bonnefon et al. [152], who designed several dedicated accident scenarios where an IV has to make decisions between scarifying pedestrians or passengers and surveyed the choices held by participants in the US. Results of the survey suggested that most participants wanted other people to buy IVs prioritising saving the most lives in the accidents. The survey mechanism was expanded and developed to an online experimental platform known as the "Moral Machine Experiment" [153] to explore the moral dilemmas faced by IVs from a global perspective. The data helped identify three strong preferences: the preference for sparing human lives, that for sparing more lives, and that for sparing young lives.

In a separate study, Morita and Managi [154] surveyed the existence of the social dilemma in Japan and found that the result is broadly similar to those obtained in the USA [153]. Of particular note is that participants in the US expressed generally stronger preferences for self-protective IVs when travelling with family over riding alone, while those in Japan did not demonstrate such inclination. This difference, argued by the authors, was due to the cultural difference between the two countries. While discussions referring to the trolly problem in the context of IV moral decision-making have been comprehensive and rich, several researchers have expressed concerns that the IVs moral dilemmas were overstressed. Cunneen et al. [155] argued that framing the ethical impact of IVs in terms of the trolley-problem-like dilemmas was misleading, while more realistic ethical framings should focus on the present and near-future technologies including HMI, machine perception, and data privacy, etc. This attitude was shared by Lundgren [156], who also questioned the methodologies in which the discussions on the IVs' trolley problem were extended.

#### IV-B2 **Environmental and Public Health Ethics**
A consensus has been achieved that the introduction of IVs will raise issues associated with environmental and public health ethics. IVs could benefit the environment by, e.g. optimising energy efficiency and emissions of individual vehicles and reducing traffic congestions caused by collisions [157]. Meanwhile, IVs could bring harms to the environment [158, 159, 160, 161]. The convenience and accessibility of IVs could unlock the additional travel demand from people who bear unnecessary travel needs [158], and the increased travel demand would in turn increased the Vehicle-Miles-Travelled (VMT) [159], and result in higher levels of noise and ElectroMagnetic Fields (EMF), both of which contribute to adverse health effects [160].

#### IV-B3 **Business Ethics**
Another two heated debate topics raised by IVs are liability and privacy, both of which are primarily targeted on the IV industry and thus fall into the theme of business ethics. Unlike most conventional vehicle accidents, accidents associated with an IV could cause controversial legal issues regarding the apportion of liability among the industrial stakeholders of the IV technology [162]. What could make the issues even worse is that these stakeholders might not even be able to predict the behaviour of an IV due to the inherent unpredictability of the machine-learning-based algorithms [163]. In conjunction, serious privacy risks could arise as the IV industry prosper - it would become increasingly uncomplicated for the industrial stakeholders to access the IV users' personal information [162, 163].

### _Future Directions:_

#### IV-C1 **Human-Machine Hybrid Intelligence**
The relationship between human and IVs is not independent. On the contrary, both are coexistent and mutually reinforcing. Human intelligence is the mentor of machine intelligence, and the latter will learn problem-solving strategies from human behaviors, so as to improve the reliability of intelligent systems [164, 165].

At the American Association for Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) conference in 2018, the conference president gave a presentation named "Challenge of human aware Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems", which pointed out the challenges we face in the development of AI systems. The presentation suggests that the purpose of AI is to augment the human labor, so in order to collaborate with AI systems, it is necessary to design them with human awareness and to build models of Human in the Loop (HITL). AD is one of typical AI systems, and it needs to combine AI algorithms with human involvement, and a HITL approach will enhance the ability of IVs to handle complex difficulties.

#### IV-C2 **Parallel Intelligence in Autonomous Driving**
Human drivers are mostly capable to detect important information from the surrounding environment and thus make rational decisions. However, this type of capability relies on a large amount of knowledge. A parallel simulation platform based parallel intelligence can greatly enrich the perception data through data enhancement in virtual scenarios. It creates abundant corner cases and diverse weather conditions to enhance detection & planning capabilities in virtual scenarios [166, 167, 168, 169, 170, 171]. In addition, through correlation guidance between virtual and realistic scenarios, models trained in virtual environments can be deployed into real IVs to improve the capability of models on urban roads.

#### IV-C3 **From Scenario Engineering to Scenario Intelligence**
Nowadays, the scenario datasets store information with different formats and standards, and without effective indexing. Thus these datasets are sparsely annotated and difficult to reuse. The purpose of scenario intelligence is to uniform the description methods & rules [172, 173, 174]. Through scenario intelligence, IVs will be able to adapt to various road conditions and driving environments, improving the intelligence level, which is one of the crucial technologies to achieve L5 AD level in the future.

## V Conclusion

In view of the large number of surveys lacking systematic summaries and macroscopic perspectives, we have made a comprehensive summary of AD and IVs. This article is Part 1 of our work. In this paper, we review the development of AD and introduce an SoS on milestone research in AD and IVs. We collect 122 surveys into 18 categories by research areas and analyse them. Datasets on AD are summarized to assist researchers to select the suitable data as fast as possible. In addition, we have pointed out the research perspectives, ethics and a few future directions on AD. This SoS offers horizontal as well as vertical research on various topics in AD.

## References

* [1] J. Li, H. Cheng, H. Guo, and S. Qiu, "Survey on artificial intelligence for vehicles," _Automotive Innovation_, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 2-14, 2018.
* [2] S. W. Loke, "Cooperative automated vehicles: A review of opportunities and challenges in socially intelligent vehicles beyond networking," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles_, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 509-518, 2019.
* [3] R. Hussain and S. Zeadally, "Autonomous cars: Research results, issues, and future challenges," _IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials_, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1275-1313, 2018.
* [4] I. Yaqoob, L. U. Khan, S. A. Kazmi, M. Imran, N. Guizani, and C. S. Hong, "Autonomous driving cars in smart cities: Recent advances, requirements, and challenges," _IEEE Network_, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 174-181, 2019.
* [5] E. Yurtsever, J. Lambert, A. Carballo, and K. Takeda, "A survey of autonomous driving: Common practices and emerging technologies," _IEEE Access_, vol. 8, pp. 58 443-58 469, 2020.
* [6] S. Grigorescu, B. Trasnea, T. Cocias, and G. Macesanu, "A survey of deep learning techniques for autonomous driving," _Journal of Field Robotics_, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 362-386, 2020.
* [7] Y. Huang and Y. Chen, "Autonomous driving with deep learning: A survey of state-of-art technologies," _CoRR_, vol. abs/2006.06091, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.06091
* [8] L. Liu, S. Lu, R. Zhong, B. Wu, Y. Yao, Q. Zhang, and W. Shi, "Computing systems for autonomous driving: State of the art and challenges," _IEEE Internet of Things Journal_, vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 6469-6486, 2020.
* [9] J. Ni, Y. Chen, Y. Chen, J. Zhu, D. Ali, and W. Cao, "A survey on theories and applications for self-driving cars based on deep learning methods," _Applied Sciences_, vol. 10, no. 8, p. 2749, 2020.
* [10] Y. Ma, Z. Wang, H. Yang, and L. Yang, "Artificial intelligence applications in the development of autonomous vehicles: a survey," _IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica_, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 315-329, 2020.
* [11] D. Omeiza, H. Webb, M. Jirotka, and L. Kunze, "Explanations in autonomous driving: A survey," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems_, 2021.
* [12] C. Badue, R. Guidolini, R. V. Carneiro, P. Azevedo, V. B. Cardoso, A. Forcchi, L. Jesus, R. Berriel, T. M. Paixao, F. Mutz _et al._, "Self-driving cars: A survey," _Expert Systems with Applications_, vol. 165, p. 113816, 2021.
* [13] D. Saha and S. De, "Practical self-driving cars: Survey of the state-of-the-art," 2022.
* [14] G. Bresson, Z. Alsayed, L. Yu, and S. Glaser, "Simultaneous localization and mapping: A survey of current trends in autonomous driving," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles_, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 194-220, 2017.
* [15] S. Kuutti, S. Fallah, K. Katsaros, M. Dianati, F. Mccullough, and A. Mouzakitis, "A survey of the state-of-the-art localization techniques and their potentials for autonomous vehicle applications," _IEEE Internet of Things Journal_, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 829-846, 2018.
* [16] T. T. O. Takchi, N. A. Bakar, S. A. Rahman, R. Hamzah, and Z. Aziz, "A brief survey on SLAM methods in autonomous vehicle," _International Journal of Engineering & Technology_, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 38-43, 2018.
* [17] H. Guo, D. Cao, H. Chen, C. Lv, H. Wang, and S. Yang, "Vehicle dynamic state estimation: State of the art schemes and perspectives," _IEEE/CAI Journal of Automatica Sinica_, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 418-431, 2018.
* [18] E. Leurent, "A survey of state-action representations for autonomous driving," 2018.
* [19] B. Huang, J. Zhao, and J. Liu, "A survey of simultaneous localization and mapping," _CoRR_, vol. abs/1909.05214, 2019. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.05214
* [20] Q. Luo, Y. Cao, J. Liu, and A. Benslimane, "Localization and navigation in autonomous driving: Threats and countermeasures," _IEEE Wireless Communications_, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 38-45, 2019.
* [21] A. Singandhuge and H. M. La, "A review of slam techniques and security in autonomous driving," in _2019 Third IEEE International Conference on Robotic Computing (IRC)_. IEEE, 2019, pp. 602-607.
* [22] A. Chehri, N. Quadar, and R. Saadane, "Survey on localization methods for autonomous vehicles in smart cities," in _Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Smart City Applications_, 2019, pp. 1-6.
* [23] C. Debeunne and D. Vivet, "A review of visual-LiDAR fusion based simultaneous localization and mapping," _Sensors_, vol. 20, no. 7, p. 2068, 2020.
* [24] B. Gao, H. Lang, and J. Ren, "Stereo visual slam for autonomous vehicles: A review," in _2020 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC)_. IEEE, 2020, pp. 1316-1322.
* [25] K. Wong, Y. Gu, and S. Kamijo, "Mapping for autonomous driving: Opportunities and challenges," _IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Magazine_, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 91-106, 2020.
* [26] M. Elhousni and X. Huang, "A survey on 3d lidar localization for autonomous vehicles," in _2020 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV)_. IEEE, 2020, pp. 1879-1884.
* [27] S. Chen, B. Liu, C. Feng, C. Vallespi-Gonzalez, and C. Wellington, "3d point cloud processing and learning for autonomous driving: Impacting map creation, localization, and perception," _IEEE Signal Processing Magazine_, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 68-86, 2020.
* [28] L. Li, M. Yang, B. Wang, and C. Wang, "An overview on sensor map based localization for automated driving," _2017 Joint Urban Remote Sensing Event (JURSE)_, pp. 1-4, 2017.
* [29] N. Jonnawithula, Y. Lyu, and Z. Zhang, "Lidar odometry methodologies for autonomous driving: A survey," _CoRR_, vol. abs/2109.06120, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.06120
* [30] P. Ghorai, A. Eskandarian, Y.-K. Kim, and G. Mehr, "State estimation and motion prediction of vehicles and vulnerable road users for cooperative autonomous driving: A survey," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems_, 2022.
* [31] H. Zhou and H. Wang, "Vision-based lane detection and tracking for driver assistance systems: A survey," in _2017 IEEE International Conference on Cybernetics and Intelligent Systems (CIS) and IEEE Conference on Robotics, Automation and Mechatronics (RAM)_. IEEE, 2017, pp. 660-665.
* [32] S. P. Narote, P. N. Bhujbal, A. S. Narote, and D. M. Dhane, "A review of recent advances in lane detection and departure warning system," _Pattern Recognition_, vol. 73, pp. 216-234, 2018.
* [33] Y. Xing, C. Lv, L. Chen, H. Wang, H. Wang, D. Cao, E. Veletuis, and F.-Y. Wang, "Advances in vision-based lane detection: algorithms, integration, assessment, and perspectives on aep-based parallel vision," _IEEE/CAI Journal of Automatica Sinica_, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 645-661, 2018.
* [34] M. Feniche and T. Mazri, "Lane detection and tracking for intelligent vehicles: A survey," in _2019 International Conference of Computer Science and Renewable Energies (ICCSRE)_. IEEE, 2019, pp. 1-4.
* [35] N. B. Chetan, J. Gong, H. Zhou, D. Bi, J. Lan, and L. Qie, "An overview of recent progress of lane detection for autonomous driving," in _2019 6th International Conference on Dependable Systems and Their Applications (DSA)_. IEEE, 2020, pp. 341-346.
* [36] D. Vajak, M. Vranjes, R. Grbic, and D. Vranjes, "Recent advances in vision-based lane detection solutions for automotive applications," in _2019 International Symposium ELMAR_. IEEE, 2019, pp. 45-50.
* [37] D. Liang, Y.-C. Guo, S.-K. Zhang, T.-J. Mu, and X. Huang, "Lane detection: a survey with new results," _Journal of Computer Science and Technology_, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 493-505, 2020.
* [38] M. J. Muril, N. H. A. Aziz, H. A. Ghani, and N. A. Ab Aziz, "A review on deep learning and nondecp learning approach for lane detection system," in _2020 IEEE 8th Conference on Systems, Process and Control (ICSPC)_. IEEE, 2020, pp. 162-166.
* [39] J. Tang, S. Li, and P. Liu, "A review of lane detection methods based on deep learning," _Pattern Recognition_, vol. 111, p. 107623, 2021.
* [40] S. Waykole, N. Shiwakoti, and P. Stasinopoulos, "Review on lane detection and tracking algorithms of advanced driver assistance system," _Sustainability_, vol. 13, no. 20, p. 11417, 2021.
* [41] A. Ucar, Y. Demir, and C. Guzelis, "Object recognition and detection with deep learning for autonomous driving applications," _Simulation_, vol. 93, no. 9, pp. 759-769, 2017.
* [42] M. Siam, S. Elkerdawy, M. Jagersand, and S. Yogamani, "Deep semantic segmentation for automated driving: Taxonomy, roadmap and challenges," in _2017 IEEE 20th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC)_. IEEE, 2017, pp. 1-8.
* [43] D. Gruyer, V. Magnier, K. Hamdi, L. Claussmann, O. Orfila, and A. Rakotonirainy, "Perception, information processing and modeling: Critical stages for autonomous driving applications," _Annual Reviews in Control_, vol. 44, pp. 323-341, 2017.
* [44] Y. Chen, D. Zhao, L. Lv, and Q. Zhang, "Multi-task learning for dangerous object detection in autonomous driving," _Information Sciences_, vol. 432, pp. 559-571, 2018.
* [45] J. Van Brummelen, M. O'Brien, D. Gruyer, and H. Najjaran, "Autonomous vehicle perception: The technology of today and tomorrow," _Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies_, vol. 89, pp. 384-406, 2018.
* [46] Z. Yang and L. S. Pin-Cheng, "Vehicle detection in intelligent transportation systems and its applications under varying environments: A review," _Image and Vision Computing_, vol. 69, pp. 143-154, 2018.
* [47] E. Arnold, O. Y. Al-Jarrah, M. Dianati, S. Fallah, D. Oxtoby, and A. Mouzakitis, "A survey on 3d object detection methods for autonomous driving applications," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems_, vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 3782-3795, 2019.
* [48] C. Michaelis, B. Mitzkus, R. Geirhos, E. Rusak, O. Bringmann, A. S. Ecker, M. Bethge, and W. Brendel,
* [49] "Benchmarking robustness in object detection: Autonomous driving when winter is coming," _CoRR_, vol. abs/1907.07484, 2019. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1907.07484
* [50] S. Ahmed, M. N. Huda, S. Rajbhandari, C. Saha, M. Elshaw, and S. Kanarachos, "Pedestrian and cyclist detection and intent estimation for autonomous vehicles: A survey," _Applied Sciences_, vol. 9, no. 11, p. 2335, 2019.
* [51] C. Kaymak and A. Ucar, "A brief survey and an application of semantic image segmentation for autonomous driving," _Handbook of Deep Learning Applications_, pp. 161-200, 2019.
* [52] H. Fujiyoshi, T. Hirakawa, and T. Yamashita, "Deep learning-based image recognition for autonomous driving," _IATSS Research_, vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 244-252, 2019.
* [53] E. Che, J. Jung, and M. J. Olsen, "Object recognition, segmentation, and classification of mobile laser scanning point clouds: A state of the art review," _Sensors_, vol. 19, no. 4, p. 810, 2019.
* [54] J. Janai, F. Guney, A. Behl, A. Geiger _et al._, "Computer vision for autonomous vehicles: Problems, datasets and state of the art," _Foundations and Trends(r) in Computer Graphics and Vision_, vol. 12, no. 1-3, pp. 1-308, 2020.
* [55] X. Yu and M. Marinov, "A study on recent developments and issues with obstacle detection systems for automated vehicles," _Sustainability_, vol. 12, no. 8, p. 3281, 2020.
* [56] J. Fayyad, M. A. Jaradat, D. Gruyer, and H. Najjaran, "Deep learning sensor fusion for autonomous vehicle perception and localization: A review," _Sensors_, vol. 20, no. 15, p. 4220, 2020.
* [57] Y. Li, L. Ma, Z. Zhong, F. Liu, M. A. Chapman, D. Cao, and J. Li, "Deep learning for lidar point clouds in autonomous driving: A review," _IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems_, vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 3412-3432, 2020.
* [58] J.-w. Hu, B.-y. Zheng, C. Wang, C.-h. Zhao, X.-l. Hou, Q. Pan, and Z. Xu, "A survey on multi-sensor fusion based obstacle detection for intelligent ground vehicles in off-road environments," _Frontiers of Information Technology & Electronic Engineering_, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 675-692, 2020.
* [59] L. Chen, N. Ma, P. Wang, J. Li, P. Wang, G. Pang, and X. Shi, "Survey of pedestrian action recognition techniques for autonomous driving," _Tsinghua Science and Technology_, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 458-470, 2020.
* [60] J. Fan, T. Huo, and X. Li, "A review of one-stage detection algorithms in autonomous driving," in _2020 4th CAA International Conference on Vehicular Control and Intelligence (CVCI)_. IEEE, 2020, pp. 210-214.
* [61] D. Feng, C. Haase-Schutz, L. Rosenbaum, H. Hertlein, C. Glasser, F. Timm, W. Wiesbeck, and K. Dietmayer, "Deep multi-modal object detection and semantic segmentation for autonomous driving: Datasets, methods, and challenges," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems_, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1341-1360, 2020.
* [62] Y. Cui, R. Chen, W. Chu, L. Chen, D. Tian, Y. Li, and D. Cao, "Deep learning for image and point cloud fusion in autonomous driving: A review," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems_, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 722-739, 2021.
* [63] A. Boukerche and Z. Hou, "Object detection using deep learning methods in traffic scenarios." _ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR)_, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 1-35, 2021.
* [64] D. Feng, A. Harakeh, S. L. Waslander, and K. Dietmayer, "A review and comparative study on probabilistic object detection in autonomous driving," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems_, 2021.
* [65] M. Gulzar, Y. Muhammad, and N. Muhammad, "A survey on motion prediction of pedestrians and vehicles for autonomous driving," _IEEE Access_, 2021.
* [66] D. Fernandes, A. Silva, R. Nevoa, C. Simoes, D. Gonzalez, M. Guevara, P. Novais, J. Monteiro, and P. Melo-Pinto, "Point-cloud based 3d object detection and classification methods for self-driving applications: A survey and taxonomy," _Information Fusion_, vol. 68, pp. 161-191, 2021.
* [67] A. Gupta, A. Anpalagan, L. Guan, and A. S. Khwaja, "Deep learning for object detection and scene perception in self-driving cars: Survey, challenges, and open issues," _Array_, vol. 10, p. 100057, 2021.
* [68] Z. Wei, F. Zhang, S. Chang, Y. Liu, H. Wu, and Z. Feng, "Mmwave radar and vision fusion for object detection in autonomous driving: A review," _Sensors_, vol. 22, no. 7, p. 2542, 2022.
* [69] J.-R. Xue, J.-W. Fang, and P. Zhang, "A survey of scene understanding by event reasoning in autonomous driving," _International Journal of Automation and Computing_, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 249-266, 2018.
* [70] S. Chen, Z. Jian, Y. Huang, Y. Chen, Z. Zhou, and N. Zheng, "Autonomous driving: cognitive construction and situation understanding," _Science China Information Sciences_, vol. 62, no. 8, pp. 1-27, 2019.
* [71] Z. Guo, Y. Huang, X. Hu, H. Wei, and B. Zhao, "A survey on deep learning based approaches for scene understanding in autonomous driving," _Electronics_, vol. 10, no. 4, p. 471, 2021.
* [72] F. Leon and M. Gavrilescu, "A review of tracking, prediction and decision making methods for autonomous driving," _CoRR_, vol. abs/1909.07707, 2019. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.07707
* [73] ----, "A review of tracking and trajectory prediction methods for autonomous driving," _Mathematics_, vol. 9, no. 6, p. 660, 2021.
* [74] D. Ridel, E. Rehder, M. Lauer, C. Stiller, and D. Wolf, "A literature review on the prediction of pedestrian behavior in urban scenarios," in _2018 21st International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC)_. IEEE, 2018, pp. 3105-3112.
* [75] S. Mozaffari, O. Y. Al-Jarrah, M. Dianati, P. Jennings, and A. Mouzakitis, "Deep learning-based vehicle behavior prediction for autonomous driving applications: A review," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems_, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 33-47, 2020.
* [76] B. Paden, M. Cap, S. Z. Yong, D. Yershov, and E. Frazzoli, "A survey of motion planning and control techniques for self-driving urban vehicles," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles_, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 33-55, 2016.
* [77] W. Schwartting, J. Alonso-Mora, and D. Rus, "Planning and decision-making for autonomous vehicles," _Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems_, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 187-210, 2018.
* [78] S. Dixit, S. Fallah, U. Montanaro, M. Dianati, A. Stevens, F. Mccullough, and A. Mouzakitis, "Trajectory planning and tracking for autonomous overtaking: State-of-the-art and future prospects," _Annual Reviews in Control_, vol. 45, pp. 76-86, 2018.
* [79] L. Claussmann, M. Revilloud, D. Gruyer, and S. Glaser, "A review of motion planning for highway autonomous driving," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems_, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 1826-1848, 2019.
* [80] K. Tong, Z. Ajanovic, and G. Stettinger, "Overview of tools supporting planning for automated driving," in _2020 IEEE 23rd International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC)_. IEEE, 2020, pp. 1-8.
* [81] A. Tijani, "Obstacle avoidance path design for autonomous vehicles - a review," _Technium: Romanian Journal of Applied Sciences and Technology_, vol. 3, no. 5, p. 64-81, Jul. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://techniumscience.com/index.php/technium/article/view/3810
* [82] B. R. Kiran, I. Sobh, V. Talpaert, P. Mannion, A. A. Al Sallab, S. Yogamani, and P. Perez, "Deep reinforcement learning for autonomous driving: A survey," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems_, 2021.
* [83] A. Tampuu, T. Matiisen, M. Semikin, D. Fishman, and N. Muhammad, "A survey of end-to-end driving: Architectures and training methods," _IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems_, 2020.
* [84] C. M. Martinez, M. Heucke, F.-Y. Wang, B. Gao, and D. Cao, "Driving style recognition for intelligent vehicle control and advanced driver assistance: A survey," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems_, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 666-676, 2017.
* [85] M. De Ryck, M. Versteyhe, and F. Debrouwere, "Automated guided vehicle systems, state-of-the-art control algorithms and techniques," _Journal of Manufacturing Systems_, vol. 54, pp. 152-173, 2020.
* [86] W. Morales-Alvarez, O. Sipele, R. Leberon, H. H. Tadjine, and C. Olavetri-Montcal, "Automated driving: A literature review of the take over request in conditional automation," _Electronics_, vol. 9, no. 12, p. 2087, 2020.
* [87] M. R. Vinothkanna, "A survey on novel estimation approach of motion controllers for self-driving cars," _Journal of Electronics_, vol. 2, no. 04, pp. 211-219, 2020.
* [88] S. Devi, P. Malarvezhi, R. Dayana, and K. Vadivukkarasi, "A comprehensive survey on autonomous driving cars: A perspective view," _Wireless Personal Communications_, vol. 114, no. 3, pp. 2121-2133, 2020.
* [89] S. Kuutti, R. Bowden, Y. Jin, P. Barber, and S. Fallah, "A survey of deep learning applications to autonomous vehicle control," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems_, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 712-733, 2021.
* [90] P. Shi and B. Yan, "A survey on intelligent control for multiagent systems," _IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems_, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 161-175, 2020.
* [91] S.-C. Lin, Y. Zhang, C.-H. Hsu, M. Skach, M. E. Haque, L. Tang, and J. Mars, "The architectural implications of autonomous driving: Constraints and acceleration," in _Proceedings of the Twenty-Third International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems_, 2018, pp. 751-766.
* [92] S. Liu, L. Liu, J. Tang, B. Yu, Y. Wang, and W. Shi, "Edge computing for autonomous driving: Opportunities and challenges," _Proceedings of the IEEE_, vol. 107, no. 8, pp. 1697-1716, 2019.
* [93] F. Concas, J. K. Nurminen, T. Mikkonen, and S. Tarkoma, "Validation frameworks for self-driving vehicles: A survey," in _Smart Cities: A Data Analytics Perspective_. Springer, 2021, pp. 197-212.
* [94] M. V. L. d. Carvalho _et al._, "A review of ros based autonomous driving platforms to carry out automated driving functions," 2022.
* [95] S. Campbell, N. O'Mahony, L. Krpalcova, D. Riordan, J. Walsh, A. Murphy, and C. Ryan, "Sensor technology in autonomous vehicles: A review," in _2018 29th Irish Signals and Systems Conference (ISSC)_. IEEE, 2018, pp. 1-4.
* [96] T. Zhou, M. Yang, K. Jiang, H. Wong, and D. Yang, "Mmw radar-based technologies in autonomous driving: A review," _Sensors_, vol. 20, no. 24, p. 7283, 2020.
* [97] D. J. Yeong, G. Velasco-Hernandez, J. Barry, and J. Walsh, "Sensor and sensor fusion technology in autonomous vehicles: A review," _Sensors_, vol. 21, no. 6, p. 2140, 2021.
* [98] J. Gwak, J. Jung, R. Oh, M. Park, M. A. K. Rakhimov, and J. Ahn, "A review of intelligent self-driving vehicle software research," _KSII Transactions on Internet and Information Systems (TIIS)_, vol. 13, no. 11, pp. 5299-5320, 2019.
* [99] P. Jing, H. Huang, and L. Chen, "An adaptive traffic signal control in a connected vehicle environment: A systematic review," _Information_, vol. 8, no. 3, p. 101, 2017.
* [100] E. Maashimye, S. K. Ray, N. I. Sarkar, and J. A. Gutierrez, "Vehicle-to-infrastructure communication over multi-tier heterogeneous networks: A survey," _Computer Networks_, vol. 112, pp. 144-166, 2017.
* [101] J. E. Siegel, D. C. Erb, and S. E. Sarma, "A survey of the connected vehicle landscape--architectures, enabling technologies, applications, and development areas," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems_, vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 2391-2406, 2017.
* [102] J. Guanetti, Y. Kim, and F. Borrelli, "Control of connected and automated vehicles: State of the art and future challenges," _Annual Reviews in Control_, vol. 45, pp. 18-40, 2018.
* [103] D. Yang, K. Jiang, D. Zhao, C. Yu, Z. Cao, S. Xie, Z. Xiao, X. Jiao, S. Wang, and K. Zhang, "Intelligent and connected vehicles: Current status and future perspectives," _Science China Technological Sciences_, vol. 61, no. 10, pp. 1446-1471, 2018.
* [104] G. K. Rajabhadur, A. J. Malton, A. Walenstein, and A. E. Hassan, "A survey of anomaly detection for connected vehicle cybersecurity and safety," in _2018 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV)_. IEEE, 2018, pp. 421-426.
* [105] S. Zeaddily, J. Guerrero, and J. Contreras, "A tutorial survey on vehicle-to-vehicle communications," _Telecommunication Systems_, vol. 73, no. 3, pp. 469-489, 2020.
* [106] M. K. M. Rabby, M. M. Islam, and S. M. Imon, "A review of IoT application in a smart traffic management system," in _2019 5th International Conference on Advances in Electrical Engineering (ICAEE)_. IEEE, 2019, pp. 280-285.
* [107] P. Sewalkar and J. Seitz, "Vehicle-to-pedestrian communication for vulnerable road users: Survey, design considerations, and challenges," _Sensors_, vol. 19, no. 2, p. 358, 2019.
* [108] J. Wang, Y. Shao, Y. Ge, and R. Yu, "A survey of vehicle to everything (V2X) testing," _Sensors_, vol. 19, no. 2, p. 334, 2019.
* [109] W. Wu, R. Li, G. Xie, J. An, Y. Bai, J. Zhou, and K. Li, "A survey of intrusion detection for in-vehicle networks," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems_, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 919-933, 2019.
* [110] U. Montanaro, S. Dixit, S. Fallah, M. Dianati, A. Stevens, D. Oxtoby, and A. Mouzakitis, "Towards connected autonomous driving: review of use-cases," _Vehicle System Dynamics_, vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 779-814, 2019.
* [111] D. Pevec, J. Babic, A. Carvalho, Y. Ghiassi-Farrokhfal, W. Ketter, and V. Podobnik, "A survey-based assessment of how existing and potential electric vehicle owners perceive range anxiety," _Journal of Cleaner Production_, vol. 276, p. 122779, 2020.
* [112] C. R. Storck and F. Duarte-Figuciredo, "A survey of 5G technology evolution, standards, and infrastructure associated with vehicle-to-everything communications by internet of vehicles," _IEEE Access_, vol. 8, pp. 117 593-117 614, 2020.
* [113] X. Di and R. Shi, "A survey on autonomous vehicle control in the era of mixed-autonomy: From physics-based to AI-guided driving policy learning," _Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies_, vol. 125, p. 103008, 2021.
* [114] Q. Chao, H. Bi, W. Li, T. Mao, Z. Wang, M. C. Lin, and Z. Deng, "A survey on visual traffic simulation: Models, evaluations, and applications in autonomous driving," in _Computer Graphics Forum_, vol. 39, no. 1. Wiley Online Library, 2020, pp. 287-308.
* [115] P. Kaur, S. Taghavi, Z. Tian, and W. Shi, "A survey on simulators for testing self-driving cars," in _2021 Fourth International Conference on Connected and Autonomous Driving (MetroCAD)_. IEEE, 2021, pp. 62-70.
* [116] E. Zablocki, H. Ben-Younes, P. Perez, and M. Cord, "Explainability of vision-based autonomous driving systems: Review and challenges," _CoRR_, vol. abs/2101.05307, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.05307
* [117] A. Rasouli and J. K. Tsotsos, "Autonomous vehicles that interact with pedestrians: A survey of theory and practice," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems_, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 900-918, 2019.
* [118] W. Cao and W. Yang, "A survey of vehicle routing problem," in _MATEC Web of Conferences_, vol. 100. EDP Sciences, 2017, p. 01006.
* [119] M. Gansterer and R. F. Hartl, "Collaborative vehicle routing: a survey," _European Journal of Operational Research_, vol. 268, no. 1, pp. 1-12, 2018.
* [120] V. Vaquero, E. Repiso, and A. Sanfeliu, "Robust and real-time detection and tracking of moving objects with minimum 2d lidar information to advance autonomous cargo handling in ports," _Sensors_, vol. 19, no. 1, p. 107, 2018.
* [121] R. Losch, S. Grehl, M. Donner, C. Buhl, and B. Jung, "Design of an autonomous robot for mapping, navigation, and manipulation in underground mines," in _2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS)_. IEEE, 2018, pp. 1407-1412.
* [122] T. Erdelic and T. Caric, "A survey on the electric vehicle routing problem: variants and solution approaches," _Journal of Advanced Transportation_, vol. 2019, 2019.
* [123] K. Qin, B. Wang, H. Zhang, W. Ma, M. Yan, and X. Wang, "Research on application and testing of autonomous driving in ports," SAE Technical Paper, Tech. Rep., 2020.
* [124] A. Geiger, P. Lenz, and R. Urtasun, "Are we ready for autonomous driving? the kitti vision benchmark suite," in _2012 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition_. IEEE, 2012, pp. 3354-3361.
* [125] M. Cordts, M. Omran, S. Ramos, T. Rehfeld, M. Enzweiler, R. Benenson, U. Franke, S. Roth, and B. Schiele, "The cityscapes dataset for semantic urban scene understanding," in _Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition_, 2016, pp. 3213-3223.
* [126] F. Yu, H. Chen, X. Wang, W. Xian, Y. Chen, F. Liu, V. Madhavan, and T. Darrell, "Bdd100k: A diverse driving dataset for heterogeneous multitask learning," in _Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)_, June 2020.
* [127] G. Neuhold, T. Ollmann, S. Rota Bulo, and P. Kontschieder, "The mapillary vistas dataset for semantic understanding of street scenes," in _Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision_, 2017, pp. 4990-4999.
* [128] Q.-H. Pham, P. Sevestre, R. S. Pahwa, H. Zhan, C. H. Pang, Y. Chen, A. Mustafa, V. Chandrasekhar, and J. Lin, "A*3d dataset: Towards autonomous driving in challenging environments," in _2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)_, 2020, pp. 2267-2273.
* [129] A. Patil, S. Malla, H. Gang, and Y. Chen, "The H3D dataset for full-surround 3d multi-object detection and tracking in crowded urban scenes," _CoRR_, vol. abs/1903.01568, 2019. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1903.01568
* [130] J. Geyer, Y. Kassahun, M. Mahmudi, X. Ricou, R. Durgesh, A. S. Chung, L. Hauswald, V. H. Pham, M. Muhlegg, S. Dorn, T. Fernandez, M. Janicke, S. Mirashi, C. Savani, M. Sturm, O. Vorobiov, M. Oelker, S. Garreis, and P. Schuberth, "A2D2: audit autonomous driving dataset," _CoRR_, vol. abs/2004.06320, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.06320
* [131] S. Agarwal, A. Vora, G. Pandey, W. Williams, H. Kourous, and J. R. Mcbride, "Ford multi-av seasonal dataset," _The International Journal of Robotics Research_, 2020.
* [132] A. Dosovitskiy, G. Ros, F. Codevilla, A. Lopez, and V. Koltun, "CARLA: An open urban driving simulator," in _Conference on Robot Learning_. PMLR, 2017, pp. 1-16.
* [133] M. Felkenborf and P. Vortissi, "Microscopic traffic flow simulator vissim," in _Fundamentals of traffic simulation_. Springer, 2010, pp. 63-93.
* [134] S. Shah, D. Dey, C. Lovett, and A. Kapoor, "Airsim: High-fidelity visual and physical simulation for autonomous vehicles," in _Field and service robotics_. Springer, 2018, pp. 621-635.
* [135] H. Caesar, V. Bankiti, A. H. Lang, S. Vora, and O. Beijbom, "nuScenes: A multimodal dataset for autonomous driving," in _Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition_, 2020.
* [136] J. Houston, G. Zuidhof, L. Bergamini, Y. Ye, L. Chen, A. Jain, S. Omari, V. Iglovikov, and P. Ondruska, "One thousand and one hours: Self-driving motion prediction dataset," in _Conference on Robot Learning_. PMLR, 2021, pp. 409-418.
* [137] X. Huang, P. Wang, X. Cheng, D. Zhou, Q. Geng, and R. Yang, "The apolloscape open dataset for autonomous driving and its application," _IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence_, vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 2702-2719, 2020.
* [138] M.-F. Chang, J. Lambert, P. Sangkloy, J. Singh, S. Bak, A. Hartnett, D. Wang, P. Carr, S. Lucey, D. Ramanan, and J. Hays, "Argoverse: 3d tracking and forecasting with rich maps," in _Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition_, June 2019.
* [139] S. Ettinger, S. Cheng, B. Caine, C. Liu, H. Zhao, S. Pradhan, Y. Chai, B. Sapp, C. R. Qi, Y. Zhou _et al._, "Large scale interactive motion forecasting for autonomous driving: The waymo open motion dataset," in _Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision_, 2021, pp. 9710-9719.
* [140] H. Schafer, E. Santana, A. Haden, and R. Biasini, "A commute in data: The comma2k19 dataset," _CoRR_, vol. abs/1812.05752, 2018. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1812.05752
* [141] P. Xiao, Z. Shao, S. Hao, Z. Zhang, X. Chai, J. Jiao, Z. Li, J. Wu, K. Sun, K. Jiang _et al._, "Pandaset: Advanced sensor suite dataset for autonomous driving," in _2021 IEEE International Intelligent Transportation Systems Conference (ITSC)_. IEEE, 2021, pp. 3095-3101.
* [142] J. Mao, M. Niu, C. Jiang, H. Liang, X. Liang, Y. Li, C. Ye, W. Zhang, Z. Li, J. Yu, H. Xu, and C. Xu, "One million scenes for autonomous driving: ONCE dataset," _CoRR_, vol. abs/2106.11037, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.11037
* [143] Y. Li, Z. Li, S. Teng, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhou, Y. Zhu, D. Cao, B. Tian, Y. Ai, Z. Xuanyuan _et al._, "AutoMine: An unmanned mine dataset," in _Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition_, 2022, pp. 21308-21317.
* [144] S. Teng, X. Hu, P. Deng, B. Li, Y. Li, D. Yang, Y. Ai, L. Li, L. Chen, Z. Xuanyuan, and F. Zhu, "Motion planning for autonomous driving: The state of the art and future perspectives," 2023.
* [145] L. Li, W.-L. Huang, Y. Liu, N.-N. Zheng, and F.-Y. Wang, "Intelligence testing for autonomous vehicles: A new approach," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles_, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 158-166, 2016.
* [146] F.-Y. Wang, R. Song, R. Zhou, X. Wang, L. Chen, L. Li, L. Zeng, J. Zhou, S. Teng, and X. Zhu, "Verification and validation of intelligent vehicles: Objectives and efforts from china," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles_, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 164-169, 2022.
* [147] M. Hasenjager, M. Heckmann, and H. Wersing, "A survey of personalization for advanced driver assistance systems," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles_, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 335-344, 2019.
* [148] W. Wang and D. Zhao, "Evaluation of lane departure correction systems using a regenerative stochastic driver model," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles_, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 221-232, 2017.
* [149] M. Althoff, S. Maierhofer, and C. Pek, "Provably-correct and comfortable adaptive cruise control," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles_, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 159-174, 2020.
* [150] R. Utriainen, M. Pollanen, and H. Liimatainen, "The safety potential of lane keeping assistance and possible actions to improve the potential," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles_, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 556-564, 2020.
* [151] Z. Hu, S. Lou, Y. Xing, X. Wang, D. Cao, and C. Lv, "Review and perspectives on driver digital twin and its enabling technologies for intelligent vehicles," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles_, 2022.
* [152] Z. Hu, Y. Xing, W. Gu, D. Cao, and C. Lv, "Driver anomaly quantification for intelligent vehicles: A contrastive learning approach with representation clustering," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles_, pp. 1-1, 2022.
* [153] J.-F. Bonnefon, A. Shariff, and I. Rahwan, "The social dilemma of autonomous vehicles," _Science_, vol. 352, no. 6293, pp. 1573-1576, 2016.
* [154] E. Awad, S. Dsouza, R. Kim, J. Schulz, J. Henrich, A. Shariff, J.-F. Bonnefon, and I. Rahwan, "The moral machine experiment," _Nature_, vol. 563, no. 7729, pp. 59-64, 2018.
* [155] S. M. Tamaki Morita, "Autonomous vehicles: Willingness to pay and the social dilemma," _Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies_, vol. 119, no. 48, p. 102748, 2020.
* [156] M. Cunneen, M. Mullins, F. Murphy, D. Shannon, I. Furxhi, and C. Ryan, "Autonomous vehicles and avoiding the trolley (dilemma): vehicle perception, classification, and the challenges of framing decision ethics," _Cybernetics and Systems_, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 59-80, 2020.
* [157] B. Lundgren, "Safety requirements vs. crashing ethically: what matters most for policies on autonomous vehicles," _AI & SOCIETY_, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 405-415, 2021.
* [158] J. K. Subosits and J. C. Gerdes, "Impacts of model fidelity on trajectory optimization for autonomous vehicles in extreme maneuvers," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles_, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 546-558, 2021.
* [159] M. Talebat, A. L. Brown, H. R. Safford, S. Qu, and M. Xu, "A review on energy, environmental, and sustainability implications of connected and automated vehicles," _Environmental science & technology_, vol. 52, no. 20, pp. 11 449-11 465, 2018.
* [160] A. Soteropoulos, M. Berger, and F. Ciari, "Impacts of automated vehicles on travel behaviour and land use: an international review of modelling studies," _Transport Reviews_, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 29-49, 2019.
* [161] D. L. Soheil Sohrabi, Haneen Khreis, "Impacts of autonomous vehicles on public health: A conceptual model and policy recommendations," _Transport Reviews_, vol. 63, p. 102457, 2020.
* [162] ----, "Public health, ethics, and autonomous vehicles," _American journal of public health_, vol. 107, pp. 532-537, 2017.
* [163] L. Collingwood, "Privacy implications and liability issues of autonomous vehicles," _Information & Communications Technology Law_, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 32-45, 2017.
* [164] A. Taelhagh and H. S. M. Lim, "Governing autonomous vehicles: emerging responses for safety, liability, privacy, cybersecurity, and industry risks," _Transport Reviews_, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 103-128, 2019.
* [165] N. Zheng, Z. Liu, P. Ren, Y. Ma, S. Chen, S. Yu, J. Xue, B. Chen, and F.-Y. Wang, "Hybrid-augmented intelligence: collaboration and cognition," _Frontiers of Information Technology & Electronic Engineering_, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 153-179, 2017.
* [166] P. Zhang, C. Lan, J. Xing, W. Zeng, J. Xue, and N. Zheng, "View adaptive recurrent neural networks for high performance human action recognition from skeleton data," in _Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision_, 2017, pp. 2117-2126.
* [167] F. Tian, Z. Li, F. Wang, and L. Li, "Parallel learning-based steering control for autonomous driving," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles_, pp. 1-11, 2022.
* [168] J. Wang, X. Wang, T. Shen, Y. Wang, L. Li, Y. Tian, H. Yu, L. Chen, J. Xin, X. Wu, N. Zheng, and F.-Y. Wang, "Parallel vision for long-tail regularization: Initial results from ivfc autonomous driving testing," _IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles_, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 286-299, 2022.
* [169] L. Chen, X. Hu, W. Tian, H. Wang, D. Cao, and F.-Y. Wang, "Parallel planning: A new motion planning framework for autonomous driving," _IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica_, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 236-246, 2018.
* [170] Y. Gao, Y. Ai, B. Tian, L. Chen, J. Wang, D. Cao, and F.-Y. Wang, "Parallel end-to-end autonomous mining: An IoT-oriented approach," _IEEE Internet of Things Journal_, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 1011-1023, 2020.
* [171] X. Li, Y. Wang, L. Yan, K. Wang, F. Deng, and F.-Y. Wang, "Paralleleye-cs: A new dataset of synthetic images for testing the visual intelligence of intelligent vehicles," _IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology_, vol. 68, no. 10, pp. 9619-9631, 2019.
* [172] F.-Y. Wang, Y. Yuan, J. Li, D. Cao, L. Li, P. A. Ioannou, and M. A. Sotelo, "From intelligent vehicles to smart societies: A parallel driving approach," _IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems_, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 594-604, 2018.
* [173] L. Chen, W. Zhan, W. Tian, Y. He, and Q. Zou, "Deep integration: A multi-label architecture for road scene recognition," _IEEE Transactions on Image Processing_, vol. 28, no. 10, pp. 4883-4898, 2019.
* [174] C. Sun, J. M. U. Vianney, Y. Li, L. Chen, L. Li, F.-Y. Wang, A. Khajepour, and D. Cao, "Proximity based automatic data annotation for autonomous driving," _IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica_, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 395-404, 2020.
* [175] X. Li, P. Ye, J. Li, Z. Liu, L. Cao, and F.-Y. Wang, "From features engineering to scenarios engineering for trustworthy ai: Isai, c&c, and v&v," _IEEE Intelligent Systems_, vol. 37, pp. 18-26, 07 2022.

## VI Biography Section

**Long Chen** (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from Wuhan University in 2013, he is currently a Professor with State Key Laboratory of Management and Control for Complex Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. His research interests include autonomous driving, robotics, and artificial intelligence, where he has contributed more than 100 publications. He serves as an Associate Editor for the IEEE Transaction on Intelligent Transportation Systems, the IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica, the IEEE Transaction on Intelligent Vehicle and the IEEE Technical Committee on Cyber-Physical Systems.

**Yuchen Li** received the B.E. degree from the University of Science and Technology Beijing in 2016, and the M.E. degrees from Beihang University in 2020. He is pursuing the Ph.D. degree in Hong Kong Baptist University. He is a intern in Waytous. His research interest covers computer vision, 3D object detection, and autonomous driving.

**Chao Huang** Chao Huang received her B.S. degree in Control Engineering from the China University of Petroleum, Beijing, and a Ph.D. degree from the University of Wollongong, Australia in 2012 and 2018, respectively. She is currently a research assistant professor at the Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. Her research interests are human-machine collaboration, fault-tolerant control, mobile robot (EV, UAV), and path planning and control. She has served on program committees and helped to organize special issues on Sensors, Machines, and Aerospace. She has served as review editor of Frontiers in Mechanical Engineering and associate editor of IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles.

JOURNAL OF IHEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

**Bai Li** (SM'13-M'18) received his B.S. degree in 2013 from Belhans University, China, and the Ph.D. degree in 2018 from the College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, China. He is currently an associate professor in the College of Mechanical and Vehicle Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha, China. Before joining Hunan University, he was a research engineer of JD.com Inc., Beijing, China from 2018 to 2020. Prof. Li was the first author of more than 60 journal/conference papers and two books in numerical optimization, optimal control, and trajectory planning. He was a recipient of the International Federation of Automatic Control (IFAC) 2014-2016 Best Journal Paper Prize. He is an Associate Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES.

**Yang Xing** received his Ph. D. degree from Cranfield University, UK, in 2018. He joined Cranfield University as a Lecturer in Applied AI for Engineering in 2021. Before that, he finished his post-doctoral fellowship at the University of Oxford and Nanyang Technological University, respectively. His research interests include machine learning, driver behaviours, intelligent multi-agent collaboration, and intelligent/autonomous vehicles. He received the IV2018 Best Workshop/Special Issue Paper Award. Dr Xing serves as an associate editor for IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicle. He was also a Guest Editor for IEEE Internet of Things Journal, and IEEE ITS Magazine, etc.

**Daxin Tian** (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from Jilin University, Changchun, China, in 2002, 2005, and 2007, respectively. He is currently a professor in the School of Transportation Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China. He is an IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Society Member and an IEEE Vehicular Technology Society Member. His current research interests include mobile computing, intelligent transportation systems, vehicular ad hoc networks, and swarm operations monitoring of road freight vehicles, and vehicle energy performance assessment.

**Li Li** (Fellow, IEEE) is a Professor at Tsinghua University. He has been engaged in scientific research in the fields of intelligent transportation and intelligent vehicles. He has published more than 120 SCI search papers as the first or corresponding author. He was a member of the Editorial Advisory Board for Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, a member of the Editorial Board of Transport Reviews and ACTA Automatica Sinica. He serves as Associate Editors for the IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems and IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles. He is a Fellow of IEEE and a Fellow of CAA.

**Zhongxu Hu** received a mechatronic Ph.D. degree from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology of China, in 2018. He was a senior engineer at Huawei. He is currently a research fellow within the Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering of Nanyang Technological University in Singapore. His current research interests include human-machine interaction, computer vision, and deep learning applied to driver behavior analysis and autonomous vehicles in multiple scenarios. Dr. Hu served as a Lead Guest Editor for Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience, an Academic Editor/Editorial Board for Automotive Innovation, Journal of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, and is also an active reviewer for IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Magazine, Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, and Journal of Advanced Transportation et al.

**Xiaoxiang Na** received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in automotive engineering from the College of Automotive Engineering, Jilin University, China, in 2007 and 2009, respectively. He received the Ph.D. degree in driver-vehicle dynamics from the Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, U.K. in 2014. He is currently a Senior Research Associate with the Centre for Sustainable Road Freight, University of Cambridge, and a Borgviewicz Interdisciplinary Fellow at the University of Cambridge. His main research interests include driver-vehicle dynamics, operational monitoring of road freight vehicles, and vehicle energy performance assessment.

**Zixuan Li** received the B.E. degree from Anhui University in 2017,and the M.E. degree from the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2021. He is a intern in Waytos. His research interest cover computer vision ,communication engineering and autonomous driving.

**Siyu Teng** received M.S. degree from Jilin University in 2021. Now he is a PhD Student at Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Science, Hong Kong Baptist University. His main interests are parallel planning, end-to-end autonomous driving and interpretable deep learning.

JOURNAL OF IHEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

**Chen Lv** (Senior Member, IEEE) is a Nanyang Assistant Professor at School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He received his PhD degree at Department of Automotive Engineering, Tsinghua University, China, with a joint PhD at UC Berkeley. His research focuses on intelligent vehicles, automated driving, and human-machine systems, where he has contributed 2 books, over 100 papers, and obtained 12 granted patents. He serves as Associate Editor for IEEE T-TPS, IEEE TVT, and IEEE T-IV. He received many awards and honors, selectively including the Highly Commended Paper Award of IMechE UK in 2012, Japan NSK Outstanding Mechanical Engineering Paper Award in 2014, Tsinghua University Outstanding Doctoral Thesis Award in 2016, IEEE IV Best Workshop/Special Session Paper Award in 2018, Automotive Innovation Best Paper Award in 2020, the winner of the Waymo Open Dataset Challenges at CVPR 2021, and Machines Young Investigator Award in 2022.

**Jinjun Wang** received the B.E. and M.E. degrees from Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China, in 2000 and 2003, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, in 2006. From 2006 to 2009, he was with NEC Laboratories America, Inc., as a Research Scientist, and from 2010 to 2013, he was with Epson Research and Development, Inc., as a Senior Research Scientist. He is currently a Professor with Xi’an Jiaotong University. His research interests include pattern classification, image/video enhancement and editing, content-based image/video annotation and retrieval, and semantic event detection.

**Dongpu Cao** (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from Concordia University, Canada, in 2008. He is the Canada Research Chair in Driver Cognition and Automated Driving, and currently an Associate Professor and Director of Waterloo Cognitive Autonomous Driving (CogDrive) Lab at University of Waterloo, Canada. His current research focuses on driver cognition, automated driving and cognitive autonomous driving. He has contributed more than 200 papers and 3 books. He received the SAE Arch T. Colwell Merit Award in 2012, and three Best Paper Awards from the ASME and IEEE conferences. Dr. Cao serves as an Associate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS, IEEE/CAA JOURNAL OF AUTOMATICA SINICA and ASME JOURNAL OF DYNAMIC SYSTEMS, MEASUREMENT AND CONTROL. He was a Guest Editor for VEHICLE SYSTEM DYNAMICS and IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMC: SYSTEMS. He serves on the SAE Vehicle Dynamics Standards Committee and acts as the Co-Chair of IEEE ITSS Technical Committee on Cooperative Driving.

**Nanning Zheng** (SM93-F06) (Fellow, IEEE) graduated from the Department of Electrical Engineering, Xian Jiaotong University, Xian, China, in 1975, and received the M.S. degree in information and control engineering from Xian Jiaotong University in 1981 and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Keio University, Yokohama, Japan, in 1985. He joined Xian Jiaotong University in 1975, and he is currently a Professor and the Director of the Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xian Jiaotong University. His research interests include computer vision, pattern recognition and image processing, and hardware implementation of intelligent systems. Dr. Zheng became a member of the Chinese Academy of Engineering in 1999, and he is the Chinese Representative on the Governing Board of the International Association for Pattern Recognition.

**Fei-Yue Wang** (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in computer and systems engineering from the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, USA, in 1990. He joined The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA, in 1990, and became a Professor and the Director of the Robotics and Automation Laboratory and the Program in Advanced Research for Complex Systems. In 1999, he founded the Intelligent Control and Systems Engineering Center, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, China, under the support of the Outstanding Chinese Talents Program from the State Planning Council, and in 2002, was appointed as the Director of the Key Laboratory of Complex Systems and Intelligence Science, CAS, and Vice President of Institute of Automation, CAS, in 2006. In 2011, he became the State Specialty Appointed Expert and the Founding Director of the State Key Laboratory for Management and Control of Complex Systems. He has been the Chief Judge of Intelligent Vehicles Future Challenge since 2009 and Director of China Intelligent Vehicles Proving Center, Changshu since 2015. He is currently the Director of Intel’s International Collaborative Research Institute on Parallel Driving with CAS and Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. His research interests include methods and applications for parallel intelligence, social computing, and knowledge automation. He is a Fellow of INCOSE, IFAC, ASME, and AAAS. In 2007, he was the recipient of the National Prize in Natural Sciences of China, numerous best papers awards from IEEE Transactions, and became an Outstanding Scientist of ACM for his work in intelligent control and social computing. He was the recipient of the IEEE ITS Outstanding Application and Research awards in 2009, 2011, and 2015, respectively. IEEE SMC Norbert Wiener Award in 2014, and became the IFAC Pawl J. Nowacki Distinguished Lecturer in 2021. Since 1997, he has been the General or Program Chair of more than 30 IEEE, INFORMS, IFAC, ACM, and ASME conferences. He was the President of the IEEE ITS Society from 2005 to 2007, IEEE Council of RFID from 2019 to 2021, Chinese Association for Science and Technology, USA, in 2005, American Zhu Kexhen Education Foundation from 2007 to 2008, Vice President of the ACM China Council from 2010 to 2011, Vice President and the Secretary General of the Chinese Association of Automation from 2008 to 2018, Vice President of IEEE Systems, Man, and Cybernetics Society from 2019 to 2021. He was the Founding Editor-in-Chief (EIC) of the International Journal of Intelligent Control and Systems from 1995 to 2000. IEEE ITS Magazine from 2006 to 2007, IEEE/CAA JOURNAL OF AUTOMATICA SINICA from 2014 to 2017, China’s Journal of Command and Control from 2015 to 2021, and China’s Journal of Intelligent Science and Technology from 2019 to 2021. He was the EIC of the IEEE INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS from 2009 to 2012, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS from 2009 to 2016, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS from 2017 to 2020. He is currently the President of CAA’s Supervision Council and new EIC of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES.